The Marble Palace Zoo in Calcutta city which was established in the year 1854 is the oldest existing zoo in the country

Traditional Wetland agriculture (locally known as pokkali in Kerala and Gazhani in Karnataka) 
Biosphere Reserve (BR) is an international designation by UNESCO
Biosphere reserves are sites established by countries and recognized under UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme
The national Biosphere Reserve Programme was initiated in 1986.

Indian Biodiversity Hot Spots.
• There are 4 biodiversity hot spots present in India. They
are:
1. The Himalayas
2. Indo- Burma and
3. The western Ghats & Sri Lanka
4. Sunderland

Lion Was launch in 1972
Project Tiger centrally sponsored scheme was launched in 1973
Crocodial was launch in 1974
Project Elephant was launched in February, 1992 
 Project Snow Leopard - Jan 2009
Indian Rhino Vision 2020
Kolamarka Conservation Reserve at Sironcha in Gadchiroli  -- protect wild buffaloes

Sahyadri Tiger Reserve is a reserve in the state of Maharashtra. It was created by the Indian government in 2008
Project Elephant was launched in February, 1992 
Decline of vulture populations in India was first recorded at the Keoladeo Ghana National Park, Rajasthan.
Frogs don’t drink water they absorb it through their skin.
Indian rhino vision 2020 implemented by the department of environment and forests, Assam with The Bodo autonomous council as a active partner. 
 The programme will be supported by WWF – India, WWF areas
Manas National Park was selected as the first site for translocation of rhinos.
Ten rhinos have been released into Manas since 2008. Ten more rhinos will be moved from Kaziranga National
Project Snow Leopard - Jan 2009
• The Project Snow Leopard is an Indian initiative for strengthening wildlife conservation in the Himalayan high altitudes.
SEA TURTLE PROJECT
A significant proportion of world’s Olive Ridley Turtle
population migrates every winter to Indian coastal waters for nesting mainly at eastern coast. 
The project is being implemented in 10 coastal States of the country with special emphasis in State of Orissa.

In Kashmir, it’s found in Dachigam National Park ---Hagul project
Bhitarkanika Mangroves is a mangrove wetland in Odisha, -----UNESCO SITES

In terms of species richness, India ranks seventh in mammals, ninth in birds and fifth in reptiles. 
In terms of plant diversity, India ranks tenth in the world and fourth in Asia. India represents nearly 11% of the world’s known floral diversity. 

• It is a unique (the only one in its genus) flying squirrel that is restricted to a single valley in the Namdapha National Park. (or) W.L.S. in Arunachal Pradesh.
• Habitat: Tropical forest.
• Habitat / distribution: Found only in Namdapha Tiger Reserve in Arunachal Pradesh.
• Threats: Hunted for food.

Keoladeo National Park in Rajasthan ---Siberian Crane
Sri Venkateshwara Zoological Park located in Tirupati city in Andhra Pradesh is the largest zoo in the country
Ameenpur Lake - First Biodiversity Heritage Site

 Biosphere represents a highly integrated and interacting zone comprising of atmosphere (air), hydrosphere (water) and lithosphere (land).
Energy flows through the trophic levels: from producers to subsequent trophic levels.  It never flows in the reverse direction that is from carnivores to herbivores to producers
 A food chain starts with producers and ends with top carnivores.
Resparation ---> photosymthesis-----> organic matter(vegetable)------->food nuetireunt to animal

ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSION  is a universal process of directional change in vegetation, on an ecological time scale.

Moist deciduous forests are found throughout India except in the western and the north-western regions. 
Dry deciduous forests are found throughout the northern part of the country except in the North-East. It is also found in Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu
 Tropical Thorn forests  is found in areas with black soil: North, West, Central, and South India
Dry evergreens are found along Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka coast.

Madhya Pradesh has the largest forest cover in the country, followed by Arunachal Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. 
“India is ranked 10th in the world in forest cover, with 24.39% of land area under forest and tree cover. 
Montreux Record sites in India ----Loktak lake, Manipur ,  keoladeo national park  .
The Neknampur Lake, Hyderabad is the largest floating treatment wetland




